THE HAPPY PRINCE
High above the city, on a tall column, stood the statue of the Happy Prince.
He was gilded all over with thin leaves of fine gold, for eyes he had two bright sapphires, and a large red ruby glowed on his sword-hilt.
He was very much admired indeed.
"He is as beautiful as a weathercock," remarked one of the Town Councillors who wished to gain a reputation for having artistic tastes; "only not quite so useful," he added, fearing lest people should think him unpractical, which he really was not.
Why can't you be like the Happy Prince? asked a sensible mother of her little boy who was crying for the moon.
The Happy Prince never dreams of crying for anything.
I am glad there is some one in the world who is quite happy, muttered a disappointed man as he gazed at the wonderful statue.
 "He looks just like an angel," said the Charity Children as they came out of the cathedral in their bright scarlet cloaks and their clean white pinafores.
How do you know? said the Mathematical Master, "you have never seen one."
Ah! but we have, in our dreams, answered the children; and the Mathematical Master frowned and looked very severe, for he did not approve of children dreaming.
One night there flew over the city a little Swallow.
His friends had gone away to Egypt six weeks before, but he had stayed behind, for he was in love with the most beautiful Reed.
He had met her early in the spring as he was flying down the river after a big yellow moth, and had been so attracted by her slender waist that he had stopped to talk to her.
Shall I love you? said the Swallow, who liked to come to the point at once, and the Reed made him a low bow.
So he flew round and round her, touching the water with his wings, and making silver ripples.
This was his courtship, and it lasted all through the summer.
It is a ridiculous attachment, twittered the other Swallows; "she has no money, and far too many relations"; and indeed the river was quite full of Reeds.
Then, when the autumn came they all flew away.
After they had gone he felt lonely, and began to tire of his ladylove.
She has no conversation, he said, "and I am afraid that she is a coquette, for she is always flirting with the wind."
And certainly, whenever the wind blew, the Reed made the most graceful curtseys.
I admit that she is domestic, he continued, "but I love travelling, and my wife, consequently, should love travelling also."
Will you come away with me? he said finally to her; but the Reed shook her head, she was so attached to her home.
You have been trifling with me, he cried.
I am off to the Pyramids. Good-bye! and he flew away.
All day long he flew, and at night-time he arrived at the city.
Where shall I put up? he said; "I hope the town has made preparations."
Then he saw the statue on the tall column.
I will put up there, he cried; "it is a fine position, with plenty of fresh air." 
So he alighted just between the feet of the Happy Prince.
I have a golden bedroom, he said softly to himself as he looked round, and he prepared to go to sleep; but just as he was putting his head under his wing a large drop of water fell on him.
What a curious thing! he cried; "there is not a single cloud in the sky, the stars are quite clear and bright, and yet it is raining.
The climate in the north of Europe is really dreadful.
The Reed used to like the rain, but that was merely her selfishness."
Then another drop fell.
What is the use of a statue if it cannot keep the rain off? he said; "I must look for a good chimney-pot," and he determined to fly away.
But before he had opened his wings, a third drop fell, and he looked up, and saw--Ah! what did he see?
The eyes of the Happy Prince were filled with tears, and tears were running down his golden cheeks.
His face was so beautiful in the moonlight that the little Swallow was filled with pity.
Who are you? he said.
I am the Happy Prince.
Why are you weeping then? asked the Swallow; "you have quite drenched me."
When I was alive and had a human heart, answered the statue, "I did not know what tears were, for I lived in the Palace of SansSouci, where sorrow is not allowed to enter.
In the daytime I played with my companions in the garden, and in the evening I led the dance in the Great Hall.
Round the garden ran a very lofty wall, but I never cared to ask what lay beyond it, everything about me was so beautiful.
My courtiers called me the Happy Prince, and happy indeed I was, if pleasure be happiness.
So I lived, and so I died.
And now that I am dead they have set me up here so high that I can see all the ugliness and all the misery of my city, and though my heart is made of lead yet I cannot chose but weep."
What! is he not solid gold? said the Swallow to himself.
He was too polite to make any personal remarks out loud.
Far away, continued the statue in a low musical voice, "far away in a little street there is a poor house.
One of the windows is open, and through it I can see a woman seated at a table.
Her face is thin and worn, and she has coarse, red hands, all pricked by the needle, for she is a seamstress.
She is embroidering passionflowers on a satin gown for the loveliest of the Queen's maids-ofhonour to wear at the next Court-ball.
In a bed in the corner of the room her little boy is lying ill.
He has a fever, and is asking for oranges.
His mother has nothing to give him but river water, so he is crying.
Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow, will you not bring her the ruby out of my sword-hilt?
My feet are fastened to this pedestal and I cannot move."
I am waited for in Egypt, said the Swallow.
My friends are flying up and down the Nile, and talking to the large lotusflowers.
Soon they will go to sleep in the tomb of the great King.
The King is there himself in his painted coffin.
He is wrapped in yellow linen, and embalmed with spices.
Round his neck is a chain of pale green jade, and his hands are like withered leaves."
Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow, said the Prince, "will you not stay with me for one night, and be my messenger?
The boy is so thirsty, and the mother so sad."
I don't think I like boys, answered the Swallow.
Last summer, when I was staying on the river, there were two rude boys, the miller's sons, who were always throwing stones at me.
They never hit me, of course; we swallows fly far too well for that, and besides, I come of a family famous for its agility; but still, it was a mark of disrespect."
But the Happy Prince looked so sad that the little Swallow was sorry.
It is very cold here, he said; "but I will stay with you for one night, and be your messenger."
Thank you, little Swallow, said the Prince.
So the Swallow picked out the great ruby from the Prince's sword, and flew away with it in his beak over the roofs of the town.
He passed by the cathedral tower, where the white marble angels were sculptured.
He passed by the palace and heard the sound of dancing.
A beautiful girl came out on the balcony with her lover.
How wonderful the stars are, he said to her, "and how wonderful is the power of love!"
I hope my dress will be ready in time for the State-ball, she answered; "I have ordered passion-flowers to be embroidered on it; but the seamstresses are so lazy."
He passed over the river, and saw the lanterns hanging to the masts of the ships.
He passed over the Ghetto, and saw the old Jews bargaining with each other, and weighing out money in copper scales.
At last he came to the poor house and looked in.
The boy was tossing feverishly on his bed, and the mother had fallen asleep, she was so tired.
In he hopped, and laid the great ruby on the table beside the woman's thimble.
Then he flew gently round the bed, fanning the boy's forehead with his wings.
How cool I feel, said the boy, "I must be getting better"; and he sank into a delicious slumber.
Then the Swallow flew back to the Happy Prince, and told him what he had done.
It is curious, he remarked, "but I feel quite warm now, although it is so cold."
That is because you have done a good action, said the Prince.
And the little Swallow began to think, and then he fell asleep.
Thinking always made him sleepy.
When day broke he flew down to the river and had a bath.
What a remarkable phenomenon, said the Professor of Ornithology as he was passing over the bridge.
A swallow in winter!
And he wrote a long letter about it to the local newspaper.
Every one quoted it, it was full of so many words that they could not understand.
To-night I go to Egypt, said the Swallow, and he was in high spirits at the prospect.
He visited all the public monuments, and sat a long time on top of the church steeple.
Wherever he went the Sparrows chirruped, and said to each other, "What a distinguished stranger!" so he enjoyed himself very much.
When the moon rose he flew back to the Happy Prince.
Have you any commissions for Egypt? he cried; "I am just starting."
Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow, said the Prince, "will you not stay with me one night longer?"
I am waited for in Egypt, answered the Swallow.
"To-morrow my friends will fly up to the Second Cataract.
The river-horse couches there among the bulrushes, and on a great granite throne sits the God Memnon.
All night long he watches the stars, and when the morning star shines he utters one cry of joy, and then he is silent.
At noon the yellow lions come down to the water's edge to drink.
They have eyes like green beryls, and their roar is louder than the roar of the cataract.
Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow, said the Prince, "far away across the city I see a young man in a garret.
He is leaning over a desk covered with papers, and in a tumbler by his side there is a bunch of withered violets.
His hair is brown and crisp, and his lips are red as a pomegranate, and he has large and dreamy eyes.
He is trying to finish a play for the Director of the Theatre, but he is too cold to write any more.
There is no fire in the grate, and hunger has made him faint."
I will wait with you one night longer, said the Swallow, who really had a good heart. 
Shall I take him another ruby?
Alas! I have no ruby now, said the Prince; "my eyes are all that I have left.
They are made of rare sapphires, which were brought out of India a thousand years ago.
Pluck out one of them and take it to him.
He will sell it to the jeweller, and buy food and firewood, and finish his play."
Dear Prince, said the Swallow, "I cannot do that"; and he began to weep.
Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow, said the Prince, "do as I command you."
So the Swallow plucked out the Prince's eye, and flew away to the student's garret.
It was easy enough to get in, as there was a hole in the roof.
Through this he darted, and came into the room.
The young man had his head buried in his hands, so he did not hear the flutter of the bird's wings, and when he looked up he found the beautiful sapphire lying on the withered violets.
I am beginning to be appreciated, he cried; "this is from some great admirer.
Now I can finish my play," and he looked quite happy.
The next day the Swallow flew down to the harbour.
He sat on the mast of a large vessel and watched the sailors hauling big chests out of the hold with ropes.
Heave a-hoy! they shouted as each chest came up.
I am going to Egypt! cried the Swallow, but nobody minded, and when the moon rose he flew back to the Happy Prince.
I am come to bid you good-bye, he cried.
Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow, said the Prince, "will you not stay with me one night longer?"
It is winter, answered the Swallow, "and the chill snow will soon be here.
In Egypt the sun is warm on the green palm-trees, and the crocodiles lie in the mud and look lazily about them.
My companions are building a nest in the Temple of Baalbec, and the pink and white doves are watching them, and cooing to each other.
Dear Prince, I must leave you, but I will never forget you, and next spring I will bring you back two beautiful jewels in place of those you have given away.
The ruby shall be redder than a red rose, and the sapphire shall be as blue as the great sea."
In the square below, said the Happy Prince, "there stands a little match-girl.
She has let her matches fall in the gutter, and they are all spoiled.
Her father will beat her if she does not bring home some money, and she is crying.
She has no shoes or stockings, and her little head is bare.
Pluck out my other eye, and give it to her, and her father will not beat her." 
I will stay with you one night longer, said the Swallow, "but I cannot pluck out your eye.
You would be quite blind then."
Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow, said the Prince, "do as I command you."
So he plucked out the Prince's other eye, and darted down with it.
He swooped past the match-girl, and slipped the jewel into the palm of her hand.
What a lovely bit of glass, cried the little girl; and she ran home, laughing.
Then the Swallow came back to the Prince.
You are blind now, he said, "so I will stay with you always."
No, little Swallow, said the poor Prince, "you must go away to Egypt."
I will stay with you always, said the Swallow, and he slept at the Prince's feet.
All the next day he sat on the Prince's shoulder, and told him stories of what he had seen in strange lands.
He told him of the red ibises, who stand in long rows on the banks of the Nile, and catch gold-fish in their beaks; of the Sphinx, who is as old as the world itself, and lives in the desert, and knows everything; of the merchants, who walk slowly by the side of their camels, and carry amber beads in their hands; of the King of the Mountains of the Moon, who is as black as ebony, and worships a large crystal; of the great green snake that sleeps in a palm-tree, and has twenty priests to feed it with honey-cakes; and of the pygmies who sail over a big lake on large flat leaves, and are always at war with the butterflies.
Dear little Swallow, said the Prince, "you tell me of marvellous things, but more marvellous than anything is the suffering of men and of women.
There is no Mystery so great as Misery.
Fly over my city, little Swallow, and tell me what you see there."
So the Swallow flew over the great city, and saw the rich making merry in their beautiful houses, while the beggars were sitting at the gates.
He flew into dark lanes, and saw the white faces of starving children looking out listlessly at the black streets.
Under the archway of a bridge two little boys were lying in one another's arms to try and keep themselves warm.
How hungry we are! they said.
You must not lie here, shouted the Watchman, and they wandered out into the rain.
Then he flew back and told the Prince what he had seen.
I am covered with fine gold, said the Prince, "you must take it off, leaf by leaf, and give it to my poor; the living always think that gold can make them happy."
Leaf after leaf of the fine gold the Swallow picked off, till the Happy Prince looked quite dull and grey.
Leaf after leaf of the fine gold he brought to the poor, and the children's faces grew rosier, and they laughed and played games in the street.
We have bread now! they cried.
Then the snow came, and after the snow came the frost.
The streets looked as if they were made of silver, they were so bright and glistening; long icicles like crystal daggers hung down from the eaves of the houses, everybody went about in furs, and the little boys wore scarlet caps and skated on the ice. 
The poor little Swallow grew colder and colder, but he would not leave the Prince, he loved him too well.
He picked up crumbs outside the baker's door when the baker was not looking and tried to keep himself warm by flapping his wings.
But at last he knew that he was going to die.
He had just strength to fly up to the Prince's shoulder once more.
Good-bye, dear Prince! he murmured, "will you let me kiss your hand?"
I am glad that you are going to Egypt at last, little Swallow, said the Prince, "you have stayed too long here; but you must kiss me on the lips, for I love you."
It is not to Egypt that I am going, said the Swallow.
I am going to the House of Death.
Death is the brother of Sleep, is he not?"
And he kissed the Happy Prince on the lips, and fell down dead at his feet.
At that moment a curious crack sounded inside the statue, as if something had broken.
The fact is that the leaden heart had snapped right in two.
It certainly was a dreadfully hard frost.
Early the next morning the Mayor was walking in the square below in company with the Town Councillors.
As they passed the column he looked up at the statue: "Dear me! how shabby the Happy Prince looks!" he said.
How shabby indeed! cried the Town Councillors, who always agreed with the Mayor; and they went up to look at it.
The ruby has fallen out of his sword, his eyes are gone, and he is golden no longer, said the Mayor in fact, "he is litttle beter than a beggar!"
Little better than a beggar, said the Town Councillors.
And here is actually a dead bird at his feet! continued the Mayor.
We must really issue a proclamation that birds are not to be allowed to die here.
And the Town Clerk made a note of the suggestion.
So they pulled down the statue of the Happy Prince.
As he is no longer beautiful he is no longer useful, said the Art Professor at the University.
Then they melted the statue in a furnace, and the Mayor held a meeting of the Corporation to decide what was to be done with the metal.
We must have another statue, of course, he said, "and it shall be a statue of myself."
Of myself, said each of the Town Councillors, and they quarrelled.
When I last heard of them they were quarrelling still.
What a strange thing! said the overseer of the workmen at the foundry.
This broken lead heart will not melt in the furnace.
We must throw it away."
So they threw it on a dust-heap where the dead Swallow was also lying.
Bring me the two most precious things in the city, said God to one of His Angels; and the Angel brought Him the leaden heart and the dead bird.
You have rightly chosen, said God, "for in my garden of Paradise this little bird shall sing for evermore, and in my city of gold the Happy Prince shall praise me."
THE NIGHTINGALE AND THE ROSE
She said that she would dance with me if I brought her red roses, cried the young Student; "but in all my garden there is no red rose."
From her nest in the holm-oak tree the Nightingale heard him, and she looked out through the leaves, and wondered.
No red rose in all my garden! he cried, and his beautiful eyes filled with tears.
Ah, on what little things does happiness depend! I have read all that the wise men have written, and all the secrets of philosophy are mine, yet for want of a red rose is my life made wretched.
Here at last is a true lover, said the Nightingale.
Night after night have I sung of him, though I knew him not: night after night have I told his story to the stars, and now I see him.
His hair is dark as the hyacinth-blossom, and his lips are red as the rose of his desire; but passion has made his face like pale ivory, and sorrow has set her seal upon his brow.
The Prince gives a ball to-morrow night, murmured the young Student, "and my love will be of the company.
If I bring her a red rose she will dance with me till dawn.
If I bring her a red rose, I shall hold her in my arms, and she will lean her head upon my shoulder, and her hand will be clasped in mine.
But there is no red rose in my garden, so I shall sit lonely, and she will pass me by.
She will have no heed of me, and my heart will break."
Here indeed is the true lover, said the Nightingale.
What I sing of, he suffers--what is joy to me, to him is pain.
Surely Love is a wonderful thing.
It is more precious than emeralds, and dearer than fine opals.
Pearls and pomegranates cannot buy it, nor is it set forth in the marketplace.
It may not be purchased of the merchants, nor can it be weighed out in the balance for gold.

But with me she will not dance, for I have no red rose to give her"; and he flung himself down on the grass, and buried his face in his hands, and wept.
Why is he weeping? asked a little Green Lizard, as he ran past him with his tail in the air.
Why, indeed? said a Butterfly, who was fluttering about after a sunbeam.
Why, indeed? whispered a Daisy to his neighbour, in a soft, low voice.
He is weeping for a red rose, said the Nightingale.
For a red rose? they cried; "how very ridiculous!" and the little Lizard, who was something of a cynic, laughed outright.
But the Nightingale understood the secret of the Student's sorrow, and she sat silent in the oak-tree, and thought about the mystery of Love.
Suddenly she spread her brown wings for flight, and soared into the air.
She passed through the grove like a shadow, and like a shadow she sailed across the garden.
In the centre of the grass-plot was standing a beautiful Rose-tree, and when she saw it she flew over to it, and lit upon a spray.
Give me a red rose, she cried, "and I will sing you my sweetest song."
But the Tree shook its head.
My roses are white, it answered; "as white as the foam of the sea, and whiter than the snow upon the mountain.
But go to my brother who grows round the old sun-dial, and perhaps he will give you what you want."
So the Nightingale flew over to the Rose-tree that was growing round the old sun-dial.
Give me a red rose, she cried, "and I will sing you my sweetest song."
But the Tree shook its head.
My roses are yellow, it answered; "as yellow as the hair of the mermaiden who sits upon an amber throne, and yellower than the daffodil that blooms in the meadow before the mower comes with his scythe.
But go to my brother who grows beneath the Student's window, and perhaps he will give you what you want."
So the Nightingale flew over to the Rose-tree that was growing beneath the Student's window.
Give me a red rose, she cried, "and I will sing you my sweetest song."
But the Tree shook its head.
My roses are red, it answered, "as red as the feet of the dove, and redder than the great fans of coral that wave and wave in the ocean-cavern.
But the winter has chilled my veins, and the frost has nipped my buds, and the storm has broken my branches, and I shall have no roses at all this year."
One red rose is all I want, cried the Nightingale, "only one red rose! Is there no way by which I can get it?"
There is away, answered the Tree; "but it is so terrible that I dare not tell it to you."
Tell it to me, said the Nightingale, "I am not afraid."
If you want a red rose, said the Tree, "you must build it out of music by moonlight, and stain it with your own heart's-blood.
You must sing to me with your breast against a thorn.
All night long you must sing to me, and the thorn must pierce your heart, and your life-blood must flow into my veins, and become mine."
Death is a great price to pay for a red rose, cried the Nightingale, "and Life is very dear to all.
It is pleasant to sit in the green wood, and to watch the Sun in his chariot of gold, and the Moon in her chariot of pearl.
Sweet is the scent of the hawthorn, and sweet are the bluebells that hide in the valley, and the heather that blows on the hill.
Yet Love is better than Life, and what is the heart of a bird compared to the heart of a man?"
So she spread her brown wings for flight, and soared into the air.
She swept over the garden like a shadow, and like a shadow she sailed through the grove.
The young Student was still lying on the grass, where she had left him, and the tears were not yet dry in his beautiful eyes.
Be happy, cried the Nightingale, "be happy; you shall have your red rose.
I will build it out of music by moonlight, and stain it with my own heart's-blood.
All that I ask of you in return is that you will be a true lover, for Love is wiser than Philosophy, though she is wise, and mightier than Power, though he is mighty.
Flamecoloured are his wings, and coloured like flame is his body.
His lips are sweet as honey, and his breath is like frankincense."
The Student looked up from the grass, and listened, but he could not understand what the Nightingale was saying to him, for he only knew the things that are written down in books.
But the Oak-tree understood, and felt sad, for he was very fond of the little Nightingale who had built her nest in his branches.
Sing me one last song, he whispered; "I shall feel very lonely when you are gone."
So the Nightingale sang to the Oak-tree, and her voice was like water bubbling from a silver jar.
When she had finished her song the Student got up, and pulled a note-book and a lead-pencil out of his pocket.
She has form, he said to himself, as he walked away through the grove--"that cannot be denied to her; but has she got feeling?
I am afraid not.
In fact, she is like most artists; she is all style, without any sincerity.
She would not sacrifice herself for others.
She thinks merely of music, and everybody knows that the arts are selfish.
Still, it must be admitted that she has some beautiful notes in her voice.
What a pity it is that they do not mean anything, or do any practical good."
And he went into his room, and lay down on his little pallet-bed, and began to think of his love; and, after a time, he fell asleep.
And when the Moon shone in the heavens the Nightingale flew to the Rose-tree, and set her breast against the thorn.
All night long she sang with her breast against the thorn, and the cold crystal Moon leaned down and listened.
All night long she sang, and the thorn went deeper and deeper into her breast, and her life-blood ebbed away from her.
She sang first of the birth of love in the heart of a boy and a girl.
And on the top-most spray of the Rose-tree there blossomed a marvellous rose, petal following petal, as song followed song.
Pale was it, at first, as the mist that hangs over the river—pale as the feet of the morning, and silver as the wings of the dawn.
As the shadow of a rose in a mirror of silver, as the shadow of a rose in a water-pool, so was the rose that blossomed on the topmost spray of the Tree.
But the Tree cried to the Nightingale to press closer against the thorn.
Press closer, little Nightingale, cried the Tree, "or the Day will come before the rose is finished."
So the Nightingale pressed closer against the thorn, and louder and louder grew her song, for she sang of the birth of passion in the soul of a man and a maid.
And a delicate flush of pink came into the leaves of the rose, like the flush in the face of the bridegroom when he kisses the lips of the bride.
But the thorn had not yet reached her heart, so the rose's heart remained white, for only a Nightingale's heart's-blood can crimson the heart of a rose.
And the Tree cried to the Nightingale to press closer against the thorn.
Press closer, little Nightingale, cried the Tree, "or the Day will come before the rose is finished."
So the Nightingale pressed closer against the thorn, and the thorn touched her heart, and a fierce pang of pain shot through her.
Bitter, bitter was the pain, and wilder and wilder grew her song, for she sang of the Love that is perfected by Death, of the Love that dies not in the tomb.
And the marvellous rose became crimson, like the rose of the eastern sky.
Crimson was the girdle of petals, and crimson as a ruby was the heart.
But the Nightingale's voice grew fainter, and her little wings began to beat, and a film came over her eyes.
Fainter and fainter grew her song, and she felt something choking her in her throat.
Then she gave one last burst of music.
The white Moon heard it, and she forgot the dawn, and lingered on in the sky.
The red rose heard it, and it trembled all over with ecstasy, and opened its petals to the cold morning air.
Echo bore it to her purple cavern in the hills, and woke the sleeping shepherds from their dreams.
It floated through the reeds of the river, and they carried its message to the sea.
Look, look! cried the Tree, "the rose is finished now"; but the Nightingale made no answer, for she was lying dead in the long grass, with the thorn in her heart.
And at noon the Student opened his window and looked out.
Why, what a wonderful piece of luck! he cried; "here is a red rose! I have never seen any rose like it in all my life.
It is so beautiful that I am sure it has a long Latin name"; and he leaned down and plucked it.
Then he put on his hat, and ran up to the Professor's house with the rose in his hand.
The daughter of the Professor was sitting in the doorway winding blue silk on a reel, and her little dog was lying at her feet.
You said that you would dance with me if I brought you a red rose, cried the Student.
Here is the reddest rose in all the world.
You will wear it to-night next your heart, and as we dance together it will tell you how I love you.
But the girl frowned.
I am afraid it will not go with my dress, she answered; "and, besides, the Chamberlain's nephew has sent me some real jewels, and everybody knows that jewels cost far more than flowers."
Well, upon my word, you are very ungrateful, said the Student angrily; and he threw the rose into the street, where it fell into the gutter, and a cart-wheel went over it.
Ungrateful! said the girl.
I tell you what, you are very rude; and, after all, who are you?
Only a Student.
Why, I don't believe you have even got silver buckles to your shoes as the Chamberlain's nephew has; and she got up from her chair and went into the house.
It is not half as useful as Logic, for it does not prove anything, and it is always telling one of things that are not going to happen, and making one believe things that are not true.
In fact, it is quite unpractical, and, as in this age to be practical is everything, I shall go back to Philosophy and study Metaphysics.
So he returned to his room and pulled out a great dusty book, and began to read.
The Selfish Giant
Every afternoon, as they were coming from school, the children used to go and play in the Giant's garden. 
It was a large lovely garden, with soft green grass. 
Here and there over the grass stood beautiful flowers like stars, and there were twelve peach-trees that in the spring- time broke out into delicate blossoms of pink and pearl, and in the autumn bore rich fruit. 
The birds sat on the trees and sang so sweetly that the children used to stop their games in order to listen to them.
"How happy we are here!" they cried to each other.
One day the Giant came back. 
He had been to visit his friend the Cornish ogre, and had stayed with him for seven years.
After the seven years were over he had said all that he had to say, for his conversation was limited, and he determined to return to his own castle. 
When he arrived he saw the children playing in the garden.
"What are you doing here?" he cried in a very gruff voice, and the children ran away.
"My own garden is my own garden," said the Giant; "any one can understand that, and I will allow nobody to play in it but myself."
So he built a high wall all round it, and put up a notice-board.
TRESPASSERS WILL BE PROSECUTED
He was a very selfish Giant.
The poor children had now nowhere to play.
They tried to play on the road, but the road was very dusty and full of hard stones, and they did not like it. 
They used to wander round the high wall when their lessons were over, and talk about the beautiful garden inside.
"How happy we were there," they said to each other.
Then the Spring came, and all over the country there were little blossoms and little birds. 
Only in the garden of the Selfish Giant it was still winter. 
The birds did not care to sing in it as there were no children, and the trees forgot to blossom.
Once a beautiful flower put its head out from the grass, but when it saw the notice-board it was so sorry for the children that it slipped back into the ground again, and went off to sleep.
The only people who were pleased were the Snow and the Frost. 
"Spring has forgotten this garden," they cried, "so we will live here all the year round."
The Snow covered up the grass with her great white cloak, and the Frost painted all the trees silver. 
Then they invited the North Wind to stay with them, and he came. 
He was wrapped in furs, and he roared all day about the garden, and blew the chimney- pots down.
"This is a delightful spot," he said, "we must ask the Hail on a visit." 
So the Hail came. 
Every day for three hours he rattled on the roof of the castle till he broke most of the slates, and then he ran round and round the garden as fast as he could go. 
He was dressed in grey, and his breath was like ice.
"I cannot understand why the Spring is so late in coming," said the Selfish Giant, as he sat at the window and looked out at his cold white garden; "I hope there will be a change in the weather."
But the Spring never came, nor the Summer. 
The Autumn gave golden fruit to every garden, but to the Giant's garden she gave none.
"He is too selfish," she said.
So it was always Winter there, and the North Wind, and the Hail, and the Frost, and the Snow danced about through the trees.
One morning the Giant was lying awake in bed when he heard some lovely music.
It sounded so sweet to his ears that he thought it must be the King's musicians passing by.
It was really only a little linnet singing outside his window, but it was so long since he had heard a bird sing in his garden that it seemed to him to be the most beautiful music in the world.
Then the Hail stopped dancing over his head, and the North Wind ceased roaring, and a delicious perfume came to him through the open casement.
"I believe the Spring has come at last," said the Giant; and he jumped out of bed and looked out.
What did he see?
He saw a most wonderful sight. 
Through a little hole in the wall the children had crept in, and they were sitting in the branches of the trees.
In every tree that he could see there was a little child.
And the trees were so glad to have the children back again that they had covered themselves with blossoms, and were waving their arms gently above the children's heads. 
The birds were flying about and twittering with delight, and the flowers were looking up through the green grass and laughing. 
It was a lovely scene, only in one corner it was still winter.
It was the farthest corner of the garden, and in it was standing a little boy.
He was so small that he could not reach up to the branches of the tree, and he was wandering all round it, crying bitterly.
The poor tree was still quite covered with frost and snow, and the North Wind was blowing and roaring above it.
"Climb up! little boy," said the Tree, and it bent its branches down as low as it could; but the boy was too tiny.
And the Giant's heart melted as he looked out.
"How selfish I have been!" he said; "now I know why the Spring would not come here.
I will put that poor little boy on the top of the tree, and then I will knock down the wall, and my garden shall be the children's playground for ever and ever."
He was really very sorry for what he had done.
So he crept downstairs and opened the front door quite softly, and went out into the garden.
But when the children saw him they were so frightened that they all ran away, and the garden became winter again.
Only the little boy did not run, for his eyes were so full of tears that he did not see the Giant coming.
And the Giant stole up behind him and took him gently in his hand, and put him up into the tree.
And the tree broke at once into blossom, and the birds came and sang on it, and the little boy stretched out his two arms and flung them round the Giant's neck, and kissed him.
And the other children, when they saw that the Giant was not wicked any longer, came running back, and with them came the Spring.
"It is your garden now, little children," said the Giant, and he took a great axe and knocked down the wall. 
And when the people were going to market at twelve o'clock they found the Giant playing with the children in the most beautiful garden they had ever seen.
All day long they played, and in the evening they came to the Giant to bid him good-bye.
"But where is your little companion?" he said: "the boy I put into the tree."
The Giant loved him the best because he had kissed him.
"We don't know," answered the children; "he has gone away."
"You must tell him to be sure and come here tomorrow," said the Giant.
But the children said that they did not know where he lived, and had never seen him before; and the Giant felt very sad.
Every afternoon, when school was over, the children came and played with the Giant.
But the little boy whom the Giant loved was never seen again.
The Giant was very kind to all the children, yet he longed for his first little friend, and often spoke of him.
"How I would like to see him!" he used to say.
Years went over, and the Giant grew very old and feeble. 
He could not play about any more, so he sat in a huge armchair, and watched the children at their games, and admired his garden.
"I have many beautiful flowers," he said; "but the children are the most beautiful flowers of all."
One winter morning he looked out of his window as he was dressing. 
He did not hate the Winter now, for he knew that it was merely the Spring asleep, and that the flowers were resting.
Suddenly he rubbed his eyes in wonder, and looked and looked. 
It certainly was a marvellous sight. 
In the farthest corner of the garden was a tree quite covered with lovely white blossoms.
Its branches were all golden, and silver fruit hung down from them, and underneath it stood the little boy he had loved.
Downstairs ran the Giant in great joy, and out into the garden. 
He hastened across the grass, and came near to the child.
And when he came quite close his face grew red with anger, and he said, "Who hath dared to wound thee?"
For on the palms of the child's hands were the prints of two nails, and the prints of two nails were on the little feet.
"Who hath dared to wound thee?" cried the Giant; "tell me, that I may take my big sword and slay him."
"Nay!" answered the child; "but these are the wounds of Love."
"Who art thou?" said the Giant, and a strange awe fell on him, and he knelt before the little child.
And the child smiled on the Giant, and said to him, "You let me play once in your garden, to-day you shall come with me to my garden, which is Paradise."
And when the children ran in that afternoon, they found the Giant lying dead under the tree, all covered with white blossoms.
THE DEVOTED FRIEND
One morning the old Water-rat put his head out of his hole.
He had bright beady eyes and stiff grey whiskers and his tail was like a long bit of black india-rubber.
The little ducks were swimming about in the pond, looking just like a lot of yellow canaries, and their mother, who was pure white with real red legs, was trying to teach them how to stand on their heads in the water.
You will never be in the best society unless you can stand on your heads, she kept saying to them; and every now and then she showed them how it was done.
But the little ducks paid no attention to her.
They were so young that they did not know what an advantage it is to be in society at all.
What disobedient children! cried the old Water-rat; "they really deserve to be drowned." 
‘Nothing of the kind,” answered the Duck, "every one must make a beginning, and parents cannot be too patient."
Ah! I know nothing about the feelings of parents, said the Waterrat; "I am not a family man. 
In fact, I have never been married, and I never intend to be.
Love is all very well in its way, but friendship is much higher.
Indeed, I know of nothing in the world that is either nobler or rarer than a devoted friendship."
And what, pray, is your idea of the duties of a devoted friend? asked a Green Linnet, who was sitting in a willow-tree hard by, and had overheard the conversation.
Yes, that is just what I want to know, said the Duck; and she swam away to the end of the pond, and stood upon her head, in order to give her children a good example.
What a silly question! cried the Water-rat.
I should expect my devoted friend to be devoted to me, of course.
And what would you do in return? said the little bird, swinging upon a silver spray, and flapping his tiny wings.
I don't understand you, answered the Water-rat.
Let me tell you a story on the subject, said the Linnet.
Is the story about me? asked the Water-rat.
If so, I will listen to it, for I am extremely fond of fiction.
It is applicable to you, answered the Linnet; and he flew down, and alighting upon the bank, he told the story of The Devoted Friend.
Once upon a time, said the Linnet, "there was an honest little fellow named Hans."
Was he very distinguished? asked the Water-rat.
No, answered the Linnet, "I don't think he was distinguished at all, except for his kind heart, and his funny round good-humoured face.
He lived in a tiny cottage all by himself, and every day he worked in his garden.
In all the country-side there was no garden so lovely as his.
Sweet-william grew there, and Gilly-flowers, and Shepherds'-purses, and Fair-maids of France.
There were damask Roses, and yellow Roses, lilac Crocuses, and gold, purple Violets and white. Columbine and Ladysmock, Marjoram and Wild Basil, the Cowslip and the Flower-de-luce, the Daffodil and the Clove-Pink bloomed or blossomed in their proper order as the months went by, one flower taking another flower's place, so that there were always beautiful things to look at, and pleasant odours to smell.
Little Hans had a great many friends, but the most devoted friend of all was big Hugh the Miller.
Indeed, so devoted was the rich Miller to little Hans, that be would never go by his garden without leaning over the wall and plucking a large nosegay, or a handful of sweet herbs, or filling his pockets with plums and cherries if it was the fruit season.
'Real friends should have everything in common,' the Miller used to say, and little Hans nodded and smiled, and felt very proud of having a friend with such noble ideas.
During the spring, the summer, and the autumn he was very happy, but when the winter came, and he had no fruit or flowers to bring to the market, he suffered a good deal from cold and hunger, and often had to go to bed without any supper but a few dried pears or some hard nuts.
In the winter, also, he was extremely lonely, as the Miller never came to see him then.
There is no good in my going to see little Hans as long as the snow lasts,' the Miller used to say to his wife, 'for when people are in trouble they should be left alone, and not be bothered by visitors.
That at least is my idea about friendship, and I am sure I am right.
So I shall wait till the spring comes, and then I shall pay him a visit, and he will be able to give me a large basket of primroses and that will make him so happy.'
'You are certainly very thoughtful about others,' answered the Wife, as she sat in her comfortable armchair by the big pinewood fire; 'very thoughtful indeed.

'But could we not ask little Hans up here?' said the Miller's youngest son.
'If poor Hans is in trouble I will give him half my porridge, and show him my white rabbits.'
'What a silly boy you are'! cried the Miller; 'I really don't know what is the use of sending you to school.
Why, if little Hans came up here, and saw our warm fire, and our good supper, and our great cask of red wine, he might get envious, and envy is a most terrible thing, and would spoil anybody's nature.
I certainly will not allow Hans' nature to be spoiled.
I am his best friend, and I will always watch over him, and see that he is not led into any temptations.
Besides, if Hans came here, he might ask me to let him have some flour on credit, and that I could not do.
Flour is one thing, and friendship is another, and they should not be confused.
Why, the words are spelt differently, and mean quite different things.
Everybody can see that.'
'How well you talk'! said the Miller's Wife, pouring herself out a large glass of warm ale; 'really I feel quite drowsy. 
It is just like being in church.'
'Lots of people act well,' answered the Miller; 'but very few people talk well, which shows that talking is much the more difficult thing of the two, and much the finer thing also'; and he
However, he was so young that you must excuse him."
Is that the end of the story? asked the Water-rat.
Certainly not, answered the Linnet, "that is the beginning."
Then you are quite behind the age, said the Water-rat.
Every good story-teller nowadays starts with the end, and then goes on to the beginning, and concludes with the middle.
That is the new method.
I heard all about it the other day from a critic who was walking round the pond with a young man.
He spoke of the matter at great length, and I am sure he must have been right, for he had blue spectacles and a bald head, and whenever the young man made any remark, he always answered 'Pooh!'
But pray go on with your story.
I like the Miller immensely.
I have all kinds of beautiful sentiments myself, so there is a great sympathy between us.
'We often talked of you during the winter, Hans,' said the Miller, 'and wondered how you were getting on.'
'That was kind of you,' said Hans; 'I was half afraid you had forgotten me.'
'Hans, I am surprised at you,' said the Miller; 'friendship never forgets.
That is the wonderful thing about it, but I am afraid you don't understand the poetry of life.
How lovely your primroses are looking, by-the-bye!
'They are certainly very lovely,' said Hans, 'and it is a most lucky thing for me that I have so many.
I am going to bring them into the market and sell them to the Burgomaster's daughter, and buy back my wheelbarrow with the money.'
'Buy back your wheelbarrow?
What a very stupid thing to do'!
'Well, the fact is,' said Hans, 'that I was obliged to.
You see the winter was a very bad time for me, and I really had no money at all to buy bread with.
So I first sold the silver buttons off my Sunday coat, and then I sold my silver chain, and then I sold my big pipe, and at last I sold my wheelbarrow.
But I am going to buy them all back again now.'
'Hans,' said the Miller, 'I will give you my wheelbarrow.
Yes, you may set your mind at ease, I will give you my wheelbarrow.'
'Well, really, that is generous of you,' said little Hans, and his funny round face glowed all over with pleasure.
'I can easily put it in repair, as I have a plank of wood in the house.'
'A plank of wood'! said the Miller; 'why, that is just what I want for the roof of my barn.
How lucky you mentioned it!
It is quite remarkable how one good action always breeds another.
I have given you my wheelbarrow, and now you are going to give me your plank.
Of course, the wheelbarrow is worth far more than the plank, but true, friendship never notices things like that.
Pray get it at once, and I will set to work at my barn this very day.'
'Certainly,' cried little Hans, and he ran into the shed and dragged the plank out.
'It is not a very big plank,' said the Miller, looking at it, 'and I am afraid that after I have mended my barn-roof there won't be any left for you to mend the wheelbarrow with; but, of course, that is not my fault.
And now, as I have given you my wheelbarrow, I am sure you would like to give me some flowers in return.
Here is the basket, and mind you fill it quite full.'
'Quite full?' said little Hans, rather sorrowfully, for it was really a very big basket, and he knew that if he filled it he would have no flowers left for the market and he was very anxious to get his silver buttons back.
'Well, really,' answered the Miller, 'as I have given you my wheelbarrow, I don't think that it is much to ask you for a few flowers.
I may be wrong, but I should have thought that friendship, true friendship, was quite free from selfishness of any kind.'
'My dear friend, my best friend,' cried little Hans, 'you are welcome to all the flowers in my garden.
I would much sooner have your good opinion than my silver buttons, any day'; and he ran and plucked all his pretty primroses, and filled the Miller's basket.
'Good-bye, little Hans,' said the Miller, as he went up the hill with the plank on his shoulder, and the big basket in his hand.
So he jumped off the ladder, and ran down the garden, and looked over the wall.
There was the Miller with a large sack of flour on his back.
'Dear little Hans,' said the Miller, 'would you mind carrying this sack of flour for me to market?'
'Oh, I am so sorry,' said Hans, 'but I am really very busy to-day.
I have got all my creepers to nail up, and all my flowers to water, and all my grass to roll.'
'Well, really,' said the Miller, 'I think that, considering that I am going to give you my wheelbarrow, it is rather unfriendly of you to refuse.'
However, he went on bravely, and as last he reached the market.
After he had waited there some time, he sold the sack of flour for a very good price, and then he returned home at once, for he was afraid that if he stopped too late he might meet some robbers on the way.
'It has certainly been a hard day,' said little Hans to himself as he was going to bed, 'but I am glad I did not refuse the Miller, for he is my best friend, and, besides, he is going to give me his wheelbarrow.'
Early the next morning the Miller came down to get the money for his sack of flour, but little Hans was so tired that he was still in bed.
'Upon my word,' said the Miller, 'you are very lazy.
Really, considering that I am going to give you my wheelbarrow, I think you might work harder. Idleness is a great sin, and I certainly don't like any of my friends to be idle or sluggish.
You must not mind my speaking quite plainly to you.
Of course I should not dream of doing so if I were not your friend.
But what is the good of friendship if one cannot say exactly what one means?
Anybody can say charming things and try to please and to flatter, but a true friend always says unpleasant things, and does not mind giving pain.
Indeed, if he is a really true friend he prefers it, for he knows that then he is doing good.'
'I am very sorry,' said little Hans, rubbing his eyes and pulling off his night-cap, 'but I was so tired that I thought I would lie in bed for a little time, and listen to the birds singing.










But I am afraid I shall never have such beautiful ideas as you have.'
'Oh! they will come to you,' said the Miller, 'but you must take more pains.
At present you have only the practice of friendship; some day you will have the theory also.'
'Do you really think I shall?' asked little Hans.


It took him the whole day to get there and back; and when he returned he was so tired that he went off to sleep in his chair, and did not wake up till it was broad daylight.
'What a delightful time I shall have in my garden,' he said, and he went to work at once.
But somehow he was never able to look after his flowers at all, for his friend the Miller was always coming round and sending him off on long errands, or getting him to help at the mill.
Little Hans was very much distressed at times, as he was afraid his flowers would think he had forgotten them, but he consoled himself by the reflection that the Miller was his best friend.
 'Besides,' he used to say, 'he is going to give me his wheelbarrow, and that 'is an act of pure generosity.'
So little Hans worked away for the Miller, and the Miller said all kinds of beautiful things about friendship, which Hans took down in a note-book, and used to read over at night, for he was a very good scholar.
Now it happened that one evening little Hans was sitting by his fireside when a loud rap came at the door.
It was a very wild night, and the wind was blowing and roaring round the house so terribly that at first he thought it was merely the storm.
But a second rap came, and then a third, louder than any of the others.
'It is some poor traveller,' said little Hans to himself, and he ran to the door.
There stood the Miller with a lantern in one hand and a big stick in the other.
'Dear little Hans,' cried the Miller, 'I am in great trouble.
My little boy has fallen off a ladder and hurt himself, and I am going for the Doctor.
But he lives so far away, and it is such a bad night, that it has just occurred to me that it would be much better if you went instead of me.
You know I am going to give you my wheelbarrow, and so, it is only fair that you should do something for me in return.'
'Certainly,' cried little Hans, 'I take it quite as a compliment your coming to me, and I will start off at once.





'Little Hans, Doctor.'
'What do you want, little Hans?'
'The Miller's son has fallen from a ladder, and has hurt himself, and the Miller wants you to come at once.'
'All right!' said the Doctor; and he ordered his horse, and his big boots, and his lantern, and came downstairs, and rode off in the direction of the Miller's house, little Hans trudging behind him.
But the storm grew worse and worse, and the rain fell in torrents, and little Hans could not see where he was going, or keep up with the horse.
At last he lost his way, and wandered off on the moor, which was a very dangerous place, as it was full of deep holes, and there poor little Hans was drowned.
His body was found the next day by some goatherds, floating in a great pool of water, and was brought back by them to the cottage.
Everybody went to little Hans' funeral, as he was so popular, and the Miller was the chief mourner.


'A great loss to me at any rate,' answered the Miller; 'why, I had as good as given him my wheelbarrow, and now I really don't know what to do with it.
It is very much in my way at home, and it is in such bad repair that I could not get anything for it if I sold it.
I will certainly take care not to give away anything again.
One always suffers for being generous.'


But what became of the Miller? asked the Water-rat.
Oh! I really don't know, replied the Linnet; "and I am sure that I don't care."
It is quite evident then that you have no sympathy in your nature, said the Water-rat.
I am afraid you don't quite see the moral of the story, remarked the Linnet.
The what? screamed the Water-rat.
The moral.
Do you mean to say that the story has a moral?
Certainly, said the Linnet.
Well, really, said the Water-rat, in a very angry manner, "I think you should have told me that before you began.
If you had done so, I certainly would not have listened to you; in fact, I should have said 'Pooh,' like the critic.
However, I can say it now"; so he shouted out "Pooh" at the top of his voice, gave a whisk with his tail, and went back into his hole.
And how do you like the Water-rat? asked the Duck, who came paddling up some minutes afterwards.
He has a great many good points, but for my own part I have a mother's feelings, and I can never look at a confirmed bachelor without the tears coming into my eyes.
I am rather afraid that I have annoyed him, answered the Linnet.
The fact is, that I told him a story with a moral.
Ah! that is always a very dangerous thing to do, said the Duck.
And I quite agree with her.
THE STAR–CHILD
Once upon a time two poor Woodcutters were making their way home through a great pine–forest.
It was winter, and a night of bitter cold.
The snow lay thick upon the ground, and upon the branches of the trees: the frost kept snapping the little twigs on either side of them, as they passed: and when they came to the Mountain–Torrent she was hanging motionless in air, for the Ice–King had kissed her.
So cold was it that even the animals and the birds did not know what to make of it.
'Ugh!' snarled the Wolf, as he limped through the brushwood with his tail between his legs, 'this is perfectly monstrous weather.
Why doesn’t the Government look to it?'
'Weet! weet! weet!' twittered the green Linnets, 'the old Earth is dead and they have laid her out in her white shroud.'
'The Earth is going to be married, and this is her bridal dress,' whispered the Turtle–doves to each other.
Their little pink feet were quite frost–bitten, but they felt that it was their duty to take a romantic view of the situation.
'Nonsense!' growled the Wolf.
'I tell you that it is all the fault of the Government, and if you don’t believe me I shall eat you.' The Wolf had a thoroughly practical mind, and was never at a loss for a good argument.
'Well, for my own part,' said the Woodpecker, who was a born philosopher, 'I don’t care an atomic theory for explanations.
If a thing is so, it is so, and at present it is terribly cold.'
Terribly cold it certainly was.
The little Squirrels, who lived inside the tall fir–tree, kept rubbing each other’s noses to keep themselves warm, and the Rabbits curled themselves up in their holes, and did not venture even to look out of doors.
The only people who seemed to enjoy it were the great horned Owls.
Their feathers were quite stiff with rime, but they did not mind, and they rolled their large yellow eyes, and called out to each other across the forest, 'Tu–whit!Tu–whoo! Tu–whit! Tu–whoo! what delightful weather we are having!'
On and on went the two Woodcutters, blowing lustily upon their fingers, and stamping with their huge iron–shod boots upon the caked snow.
Once they sank into a deep drift, and came out as white as millers are, when the stones are grinding; and once they slipped on the hard smooth ice where the marsh–water was frozen, and their faggots fell out of their bundles, and they had to pick them up and bind them together again; and once they thought that they had lost their way, and a great terror seized on them, for they knew that the Snow is cruel to those who sleep in her arms.
But they put their trust in the good Saint Martin, who watches over all travellers, and retraced their steps, and went warily, and at last they reached the outskirts of the forest, and saw, far down in the valley beneath them, the lights of the village in which they dwelt.
So overjoyed were they at their deliverance that they laughed aloud, and the Earth seemed to them like a flower of silver, and the Moon like a flower of gold.
Yet, after that they had laughed they became sad, for they remembered their poverty, and one of them said to the other, 'Why did we make merry, seeing that life is for the rich, and not for such as we are?
Better that we had died of cold in the forest, or that some wild beast had fallen upon us and slain us.'
'Truly,' answered his companion, 'much is given to some, and little is given to others.
Injustice has parcelled out the world, nor is there equal division of aught save of sorrow.'
But as they were bewailing their misery to each other this strange thing happened.
There fell from heaven a very bright and beautiful star.
It slipped down the side of the sky, passing by the other stars in its course, and, as they watched it wondering, it seemed to them to sink behind a clump of willow–trees that stood hard by a little sheepfold no more than a stone’s–throw away.
'Why! there is a crook of gold for whoever finds it,' they cried, and they set to and ran, so eager were they for the gold.
And one of them ran faster than his mate, and outstripped him, and forced his way through the willows, and came out on the other side, and lo! there was indeed a thing of gold lying on the white snow.
So he hastened towards it, and stooping down placed his hands upon it, and it was a cloak of golden tissue, curiously wrought with stars, and wrapped in many folds.
And he cried out to his comrade that he had found the treasure that had fallen from the sky, and when his comrade had come up, they sat them down in the snow, and loosened the folds of the cloak that they might divide the pieces of gold.
But, alas! no gold was in it, nor silver, nor, indeed, treasure of any kind, but only a little child who was asleep.
And one of them said to the other: 'This is a bitter ending to our hope, nor have we any good fortune, for what doth a child profit to a man?
Let us leave it here, and go our way, seeing that we are poor men, and have children of our own whose bread we may not give to another.'
But his companion answered him: 'Nay, but it were an evil thing to leave the child to perish here in the snow, and though I am as poor as thou art, and have many mouths to feed, and but little in the pot, yet will I bring it home with me, and my wife shall have care of it.'
So very tenderly he took up the child, and wrapped the cloak around it to shield it from the harsh cold, and made his way down the hill to the village, his comrade marvelling much at his foolishness and softness of heart.
And when they came to the village, his comrade said to him, 'Thou hast the child, therefore give me the cloak, for it is meet that we should share.'
But he answered him: 'Nay, for the cloak is neither mine nor thine, but the child’s only,' and he bade him Godspeed, and went to his own house and knocked.
And when his wife opened the door and saw that her husband had returned safe to her, she put her arms round his neck and kissed him, and took from his back the bundle of faggots, and brushed the snow off his boots, and bade him come in.
But he said to her, 'I have found something in the forest, and I have brought it to thee to have care of it,' and he stirred not from the threshold.
'What is it?' she cried.
'Show it to me, for the house is bare, and we have need of many things.'
And he drew the cloak back, and showed her the sleeping child.
'Alack, goodman!' she murmured, 'have we not children of our own, that thou must needs bring a changeling to sit by the hearth?
And who knows if it will not bring us bad fortune?
And how shall we tend it?' And she was wroth against him.
'Nay, but it is a Star–Child,' he answered; and he told her the strange manner of the finding of it.
But she would not be appeased, but mocked at him, and spoke angrily, and cried: 'Our children lack bread, and shall we feed the child of another?
Who is there who careth for us?
And who giveth us food?'
'Nay, but God careth for the sparrows even, and feedeth them,' he answered.
'Do not the sparrows die of hunger in the winter?' she asked. 'And is it not winter now?'
And the man answered nothing, but stirred not from the threshold.
And a bitter wind from the forest came in through the open door, and made her tremble, and she shivered, and said to him: 'Wilt thou not close the door?
There cometh a bitter wind into the house, and I am cold.'
'Into a house where a heart is hard cometh there not always a bitter wind?' he asked.
And the woman answered him nothing, but crept closer to the fire.
And after a time she turned round and looked at him, and her eyes were full of tears.
And he came in swiftly, and placed the child in her arms, and she kissed it, and laid it in a little bed where the youngest of their own children was lying.
And on the morrow the Woodcutter took the curious cloak of gold and placed it in a great chest, and a chain of amber that was round the child’s neck his wife took and set it in the chest also.
So the Star–Child was brought up with the children of the Woodcutter, and sat at the same board with them, and was their playmate.
And every year he became more beautiful to look at, so that all those who dwelt in the village were filled with wonder, for, while they were swarthy and black–haired, he was white and delicate as sawn ivory, and his curls were like the rings of the daffodil.
His lips, also, were like the petals of a red flower, and his eyes were like violets by a river of pure water, and his body like the narcissus of a field where the mower comes not.
Yet did his beauty work him evil. For he grew proud, and cruel, and selfish.
The children of the Woodcutter, and the other children of the village, he despised, saying that they were of mean parentage, while he was noble, being sprang from a Star, and he made himself master over them, and called them his servants.
No pity had he for the poor, or for those who were blind or maimed or in any way afflicted, but would cast stones at them and drive them forth on to the highway, and bid them beg their bread elsewhere, so that none save the outlaws came twice to that village to ask for alms.
Indeed, he was as one enamoured of beauty, and would mock at the weakly and ill–favoured, and make jest of them; and himself he loved, and in summer, when the winds were still, he would lie by the well in the priest’s orchard and look down at the marvel of his own face, and laugh for the pleasure he had in his fairness.
Often did the Woodcutter and his wife chide him, and say: 'We did not deal with thee as thou dealest with those who are left desolate, and have none to succour them.
Wherefore art thou so cruel to all who need pity?'
Often did the old priest send for him, and seek to teach him the love of living things, saying to him: 'The fly is thy brother.
Do it no harm.
The wild birds that roam through the forest have their freedom.
Snare them not for thy pleasure.
God made the blind–worm and the mole, and each has its place.
Who art thou to bring pain into God’s world?
Even the cattle of the field praise Him.'
But the Star–Child heeded not their words, but would frown and flout, and go back to his companions, and lead them.
And his companions followed him, for he was fair, and fleet of foot, and could dance, and pipe, and make music.
And wherever the Star–Child led them they followed, and whatever the Star–Child bade them do, that did they.
And when he pierced with a sharp reed the dim eyes of the mole, they laughed, and when he cast stones at the leper they laughed also.
And in all things he ruled them, and they became hard of heart even as he was.
Now there passed one day through the village a poor beggar–woman.
Her garments were torn and ragged, and her feet were bleeding from the rough road on which she had travelled, and she was in very evil plight.
And being weary she sat her down under a chestnut–tree to rest.
But when the Star–Child saw her, he said to his companions, 'See! There sitteth a foul beggar–woman under that fair and green–leaved tree.
Come, let us drive her hence, for she is ugly and ill– favoured.'
So he came near and threw stones at her, and mocked her, and she looked at him with terror in her eyes, nor did she move her gaze from him.
And when the Woodcutter, who was cleaving logs in a haggard hard by, saw what the Star–Child was doing, he ran up and rebuked him, and said to him: 'Surely thou art hard of heart and knowest not mercy, for what evil has this poor woman done to thee that thou shouldst treat her in this wise?'
And the Star–Child grew red with anger, and stamped his foot upon the ground, and said, 'Who art thou to question me what I do?
I am no son of thine to do thy bidding.'
'Thou speakest truly,' answered the Woodcutter, 'yet did I show thee pity when I found thee in the forest.'
And when the woman heard these words she gave a loud cry, and fell into a swoon.
And the Woodcutter carried her to his own house, and his wife had care of her, and when she rose up from the swoon into which she had fallen, they set meat and drink before her, and bade her have comfort.
But she would neither eat nor drink, but said to the Woodcutter, 'Didst thou not say that the child was found in the forest?
And was it not ten years from this day?'
And the Woodcutter answered, 'Yea, it was in the forest that I found him, and it is ten years from this day.'
'And what signs didst thou find with him?' she cried.
'Bare he not upon his neck a chain of amber?
Was not round him a cloak of gold tissue broidered with stars?'
'Truly,' answered the Woodcutter, 'it was even as thou sayest.'
And he took the cloak and the amber chain from the chest where they lay, and showed them to her.
And when she saw them she wept for joy, and said, 'He is my little son whom I lost in the forest.
I pray thee send for him quickly, for in search of him have I wandered over the whole world.'
So the Woodcutter and his wife went out and called to the Star–Child, and said to him, 'Go into the house, and there shalt thou find thy mother, who is waiting for thee.'
So he ran in, filled with wonder and great gladness.
But when he saw her who was waiting there, he laughed scornfully and said, 'Why, where is my mother?
For I see none here but this vile beggar–woman.'
And the woman answered him, 'I am thy mother.'
'Thou art mad to say so,' cried the Star–Child angrily. 
'I am no son of thine, for thou art a beggar, and ugly, and in rags.
Therefore get thee hence, and let me see thy foul face no more.'
'Nay, but thou art indeed my little son, whom I bare in the forest,' she cried, and she fell on her knees, and held out her arms to him.
'The robbers stole thee from me, and left thee to die,' she murmured, 'but I recognised thee when I saw thee, and the signs also have I recognised, the cloak of golden tissue and the amber chain.
Therefore I pray thee come with me, for over the whole world have I wandered in search of thee.
Come with me, my son, for I have need of thy love.'
But the Star–Child stirred not from his place, but shut the doors of his heart against her, nor was there any sound heard save the sound of the woman weeping for pain.
And at last he spoke to her, and his voice was hard and bitter.
'If in very truth thou art my mother,' he said, 'it had been better hadst thou stayed away, and not come here to bring me to shame, seeing that I thought I was the child of some Star, and not a beggar’s child, as thou tellest me that I am.
Therefore get thee hence, and let me see thee no more.'
'Alas! my son,' she cried, 'wilt thou not kiss me before I go?
For I have suffered much to find thee.'
'Nay,' said the Star–Child, 'but thou art too foul to look at, and rather would I kiss the adder or the toad than thee.'
So the woman rose up, and went away into the forest weeping bitterly, and when the Star–Child saw that she had gone, he was glad, and ran back to his playmates that he might play with them.
But when they beheld him coming, they mocked him and said, 'Why, thou art as foul as the toad, and as loathsome as the adder.
Get thee hence, for we will not suffer thee to play with us,' and they drave him out of the garden.
And the Star–Child frowned and said to himself, 'What is this that they say to me?
I will go to the well of water and look into it, and it shall tell me of my beauty.'
So he went to the well of water and looked into it, and lo! his face was as the face of a toad, and his body was sealed like an adder.
And he flung himself down on the grass and wept, and said to himself, 'Surely this has come upon me by reason of my sin.
For I have denied my mother, and driven her away, and been proud, and cruel to her.
Wherefore I will go and seek her through the whole world, nor will I rest till I have found her.'
And there came to him the little daughter of the Woodcutter, and she put her hand upon his shoulder and said, 'What doth it matter if thou hast lost thy comeliness?
Stay with us, and I will not mock at thee.'
And he said to her, 'Nay, but I have been cruel to my mother, and as a punishment has this evil been sent to me.
Wherefore I must go hence, and wander through the world till I find her, and she give me her forgiveness.'
So he ran away into the forest and called out to his mother to come to him, but there was no answer.
All day long he called to her, and, when the sun set he lay down to sleep on a bed of leaves, and the birds and the animals fled from him, for they remembered his cruelty, and he was alone save for the toad that watched him, and the slow adder that crawled past.
And in the morning he rose up, and plucked some bitter berries from the trees and ate them, and took his way through the great wood, weeping sorely.
And of everything that he met he made inquiry if perchance they had seen his mother.
He said to the Mole, 'Thou canst go beneath the earth. Tell me, is my mother there?'
And the Mole answered, 'Thou hast blinded mine eyes.
How should I know?'
He said to the Linnet, 'Thou canst fly over the tops of the tall trees, and canst see the whole world.
Tell me, canst thou see my mother?'
And the Linnet answered, 'Thou hast clipt my wings for thy pleasure.
How should I fly?'
And to the little Squirrel who lived in the fir–tree, and was lonely, he said, 'Where is my mother?'
And the Squirrel answered, 'Thou hast slain mine.
Dost thou seek to slay thine also?'
And the Star–Child wept and bowed his head, and prayed forgiveness of God’s things, and went on through the forest, seeking for the beggar–woman.
And on the third day he came to the other side of the forest and went down into the plain.
And when he passed through the villages the children mocked him, and threw stones at him, and the carlots would not suffer him even to sleep in the byres lest he might bring mildew on the stored corn, so foul was he to look at, and their hired men drave him away, and there was none who had pity on him.
Nor could he hear anywhere of the beggar–woman who was his mother, though for the space of three years he wandered over the world, and often seemed to see her on the road in front of him, and would call to her, and run after her till the sharp flints made his feet to bleed.
But overtake her he could not, and those who dwelt by the way did ever deny that they had seen her, or any like to her, and they made sport of his sorrow.
For the space of three years he wandered over the world, and in the world there was neither love nor loving–kindness nor charity for him, but it was even such a world as he had made for himself in the days of his great pride.
And one evening he came to the gate of a strong–walled city that stood by a river, and, weary and footsore though he was, he made to enter in.
But the soldiers who stood on guard dropped their halberts across the entrance, and said roughly to him, 'What is thy business in the city?'
'I am seeking for my mother,' he answered, 'and I pray ye to suffer me to pass, for it may be that she is in this city.'
But they mocked at him, and one of them wagged a black beard, and set down his shield and cried, 'Of a truth, thy mother will not be merry when she sees thee, for thou art more ill–favoured than the toad of the marsh, or the adder that crawls in the fen.
Get thee gone.
Get thee gone.
Thy mother dwells not in this city.'
And another, who held a yellow banner in his hand, said to him, 'Who is thy mother, and wherefore art thou seeking for her?'
And he answered, 'My mother is a beggar even as I am, and I have treated her evilly, and I pray ye to suffer me to pass that she may give me her forgiveness, if it be that she tarrieth in this city.'
But they would not, and pricked him with their spears.
And, as he turned away weeping, one whose armour was inlaid with gilt flowers, and on whose helmet couched a lion that had wings, came up and made inquiry of the soldiers who it was who had sought entrance.
And they said to him, 'It is a beggar and the child of a beggar, and we have driven him away.'
'Nay,' he cried, laughing, 'but we will sell the foul thing for a slave, and his price shall be the price of a bowl of sweet wine.'
And an old and evil–visaged man who was passing by called out, and said, 'I will buy him for that price,' and, when he had paid the price, he took the Star–Child by the hand and led him into the city.
And after that they had gone through many streets they came to a little door that was set in a wall that was covered with a pomegranate tree.
And the old man touched the door with a ring of graved jasper and it opened, and they went down five steps of brass into a garden filled with black poppies and green jars of burnt clay.
And the old man took then from his turban a scarf of figured silk, and bound with it the eyes of the Star–Child, and drave him in front of him.
And when the scarf was taken off his eyes, the Star–Child found himself in a dungeon, that was lit by a lantern of horn.
And the old man set before him some mouldy bread on a trencher and said, 'Eat,' and some brackish water in a cup and said, 'Drink,' and when he had eaten and drunk, the old man went out, locking the door behind him and fastening it with an iron chain.
And on the morrow the old man, who was indeed the subtlest of the magicians of Libya and had learned his art from one who dwelt in the tombs of the Nile, came in to him and frowned at him, and said, 'In a wood that is nigh to the gate of this city of Giaours there are three pieces of gold.
One is of white gold, and another is of yellow gold, and the gold of the third one is red.
To–day thou shalt bring me the piece of white gold, and if thou bringest it not back, I will beat thee with a hundred stripes.
Get thee away quickly, and at sunset I will be waiting for thee at the door of the garden.
See that thou bringest the white gold, or it shall go ill with thee, for thou art my slave, and I have bought thee for the price of a bowl of sweet wine.'
And he bound the eyes of the Star–Child with the scarf of figured silk, and led him through the house, and through the garden of poppies, and up the five steps of brass.
And having opened the little door with his ring he set him in the street.
And the Star–Child went out of the gate of the city, and came to the wood of which the Magician had spoken to him.
Now this wood was very fair to look at from without, and seemed full of singing birds and of sweet–scented flowers, and the Star–Child entered it gladly.
Yet did its beauty profit him little, for wherever he went harsh briars and thorns shot up from the ground and encompassed him, and evil nettles stung him, and the thistle pierced him with her daggers, so that he was in sore distress. 
Nor could he anywhere find the piece of white gold of which the Magician had spoken, though he sought for it from morn to noon, and from noon to sunset.
And at sunset he set his face towards home, weeping bitterly, for he knew what fate was in store for him.
But when he had reached the outskirts of the wood, he heard from a thicket a cry as of some one in pain.
And forgetting his own sorrow he ran back to the place, and saw there a little Hare caught in a trap that some hunter had set for it.
And the Star–Child had pity on it, and released it, and said to it, 'I am myself but a slave, yet may I give thee thy freedom.'
And the Hare answered him, and said: 'Surely thou hast given me freedom, and what shall I give thee in return?'
And the Star–Child said to it, 'I am seeking for a piece of white gold, nor can I anywhere find it, and if I bring it not to my master he will beat me.'
'Come thou with me,' said the Hare, 'and I will lead thee to it, for I know where it is hidden, and for what purpose.'
So the Star–Child went with the Hare, and lo! in the cleft of a great oak–tree he saw the piece of white gold that he was seeking.
And he was filled with joy, and seized it, and said to the Hare, 'The service that I did to thee thou hast rendered back again many times over, and the kindness that I showed thee thou hast repaid a hundred–fold.'
'Nay,' answered the Hare, 'but as thou dealt with me, so I did deal with thee,' and it ran away swiftly, and the Star–Child went towards the city.
Now at the gate of the city there was seated one who was a leper.
Over his face hung a cowl of grey linen, and through the eyelets his eyes gleamed like red coals.
And when he saw the Star–Child coming, he struck upon a wooden bowl, and clattered his bell, and called out to him, and said, 'Give me a piece of money, or I must die of hunger.
For they have thrust me out of the city, and there is no one who has pity on me.'
'Alas!' cried the Star–Child, 'I have but one piece of money in my wallet, and if I bring it not to my master he will beat me, for I am his slave.'
But the leper entreated him, and prayed of him, till the Star–Child had pity, and gave him the piece of white gold.
And when he came to the Magician’s house, the Magician opened to him, and brought him in, and said to him, 'Hast thou the piece of white gold?'
And the Star–Child answered, 'I have it not.'
So the Magician fell upon him, and beat him, and set before him an empty trencher, and said, 'Eat,' and an empty cup, and said, 'Drink,' and flung him again into the dungeon.
And on the morrow the Magician came to him, and said, 'If to–day thou bringest me not the piece of yellow gold, I will surely keep thee as my slave, and give thee three hundred stripes.'
So the Star–Child went to the wood, and all day long he searched for the piece of yellow gold, but nowhere could he find it.
And at sunset he sat him down and began to weep, and as he was weeping there came to him the little Hare that he had rescued from the trap, And the Hare said to him, 'Why art thou weeping?
And what dost thou seek in the wood?'
And the Star–Child answered, 'I am seeking for a piece of yellow gold that is hidden here, and if I find it not my master will beat me, and keep me as a slave.'
'Follow me,' cried the Hare, and it ran through the wood till it came to a pool of water.
And at the bottom of the pool the piece of yellow gold was lying.
'How shall I thank thee?' said the Star–Child, 'for lo! this is the second time that you have succoured me.'
'Nay, but thou hadst pity on me first,' said the Hare, and it ran away swiftly.
And the Star–Child took the piece of yellow gold, and put it in his wallet, and hurried to the city.
But the leper saw him coming, and ran to meet him, and knelt down and cried, 'Give me a piece of money or I shall die of hunger.'
And the Star–Child said to him, 'I have in my wallet but one piece of yellow gold, and if I bring it not to my master he will beat me and keep me as his slave.'
But the leper entreated him sore, so that the Star–Child had pity on him, and gave him the piece of yellow gold.
And when he came to the Magician’s house, the Magician opened to him, and brought him in, and said to him, 'Hast thou the piece of yellow gold?'
And the Star–Child said to him, 'I have it not.'
So the Magician fell upon him, and beat him, and loaded him with chains, and cast him again into the dungeon.
And on the morrow the Magician came to him, and said, 'If to–day thou bringest me the piece of red gold I will set thee free, but if thou bringest it not I will surely slay thee.'
So the Star–Child went to the wood, and all day long he searched for the piece of red gold, but nowhere could he find it.
And at evening he sat him down and wept, and as he was weeping there came to him the little Hare.
And the Hare said to him, 'The piece of red gold that thou seekest is in the cavern that is behind thee.
Therefore weep no more but be glad.'
'How shall I reward thee?' cried the Star–Child, 'for lo! this is the third time thou hast succoured me.'
'Nay, but thou hadst pity on me first,' said the Hare, and it ran away swiftly.
And the Star–Child entered the cavern, and in its farthest corner he found the piece of red gold.
So he put it in his wallet, and hurried to the city.
And the leper seeing him coming, stood in the centre of the road, and cried out, and said to him, 'Give me the piece of red money, or I must die,' and the Star–Child had pity on him again, and gave him the piece of red gold, saying, 'Thy need is greater than mine.'
Yet was his heart heavy, for he knew what evil fate awaited him.
But lo! as he passed through the gate of the city, the guards bowed down and made obeisance to him, saying, 'How beautiful is our lord!' and a crowd of citizens followed him, and cried out, 'Surely there is none so beautiful in the whole world!' so that the Star–Child wept, and said to himself, 'They are mocking me, and making light of my misery.'
And so large was the concourse of the people, that he lost the threads of his way, and found himself at last in a great square, in which there was a palace of a King.
And the gate of the palace opened, and the priests and the high officers of the city ran forth to meet him, and they abased themselves before him, and said, 'Thou art our lord for whom we have been waiting, and the son of our King.'
And the Star–Child answered them and said, 'I am no king’s son, but the child of a poor beggar–woman.
And how say ye that I am beautiful, for I know that I am evil to look at?'
Then he, whose armour was inlaid with gilt flowers, and on whose helmet crouched a lion that had wings, held up a shield, and cried, 'How saith my lord that he is not beautiful?'
And the Star–Child looked, and lo! his face was even as it had been, and his comeliness had come back to him, and he saw that in his eyes which he had not seen there before.
And the priests and the high officers knelt down and said to him, 'It was prophesied of old that on this day should come he who was to rule over us.
Therefore, let our lord take this crown and this sceptre, and be in his justice and mercy our King over us.'
But he said to them, 'I am not worthy, for I have denied the mother who bare me, nor may I rest till I have found her, and known her forgiveness.
Therefore, let me go, for I must wander again over the world, and may not tarry here, though ye bring me the crown and the sceptre.'
And as he spake he turned his face from them towards the street that led to the gate of the city, and lo!
Amongst the crowd that pressed round the soldiers, he saw the beggar–woman who was his mother, and at her side stood the leper, who had sat by the road.
And a cry of joy broke from his lips, and he ran over, and kneeling down he kissed the wounds on his mother’s feet, and wet them with his tears.
He bowed his head in the dust, and sobbing, as one whose heart might break, he said to her: 'Mother, I denied thee in the hour of my pride.
Accept me in the hour of my humility.
Mother, I gave thee hatred.
Do thou give me love.
Mother, I rejected thee.
Receive thy child now.'
But the beggar–woman answered him not a word.
And he reached out his hands, and clasped the white feet of the leper, and said to him: 'Thrice did I give thee of my mercy.
Bid my mother speak to me once.'
But the leper answered him not a word.
And he sobbed again and said: 'Mother, my suffering is greater than I can bear.
Give me thy forgiveness, and let me go back to the forest.'
And the beggar–woman put her hand on his head, and said to him, 'Rise,' and the leper put his hand on his head, and said to him, 'Rise,' also.
And he rose up from his feet, and looked at them, and lo! they were a King and a Queen.
And the Queen said to him, 'This is thy father whom thou hast succoured.'
And the King said, 'This is thy mother whose feet thou hast washed with thy tears.'
And they fell on his neck and kissed him, and brought him into the palace and clothed him in fair raiment, and set the crown upon his head, and the sceptre in his hand, and over the city that stood by the river he ruled, and was its lord.
Much justice and mercy did he show to all, and the evil Magician he banished, and to the Woodcutter and his wife he sent many rich gifts, and to their children he gave high honour.
Nor would he suffer any to be cruel to bird or beast, but taught love and loving–kindness and charity, and to the poor he gave bread, and to the naked he gave raiment, and there was peace and plenty in the land.
Yet ruled he not long, so great had been his suffering, and so bitter the fire of his testing, for after the space of three years he died.
And he who came after him ruled evilly.